README.md, before:

# Titanic Survival - an Archetypal Machine Learning Workflow

This repository contains a Python-based Machine Learning (ML) project, whose principle aim is to demonstrate an archetypal ML workflow within a Jupyter notebook, using the Titanic binary classification dataset hosted on [Kaggle](https://www.kaggle.com). The ML workflow includes: some data exploration, feature engineering, model training and selection that yields a persisted prediction pipeline, that can be used in other projects downstream. We have already downloaded the data from Kaggle, in CSV format, to the data directory in this project's root directory.

## Managing Project Dependencies using Pipenv

We use [pipenv](https://docs.pipenv.org) for managing project dependencies and Python environments (i.e. virtual environments). All of the direct packages dependencies required to run the code (e.g. NumPy for arrays/tensors and Pandas for DataFrames), as well as all the packages used during development (e.g. flake8 for code linting and IPython for interactive console sessions), are described in the `Pipfile`. Their **precise** downstream dependencies are described in `Pipfile.lock`.

### Installing Pipenv

To get started with Pipenv, first of all download it - assuming that there is a global version of Python available on your system and on the PATH, then this can be achieved by running the following command,

```bash
pip3 install pipenv
```

Pipenv is also available to install from many non-Python package managers. For example, on OS X it can be installed using the [Homebrew](https://brew.sh) package manager, with the following terminal command,

```bash
brew install pipenv
```

For more information, including advanced configuration options, see the [official pipenv documentation](https://docs.pipenv.org).

### Installing this Projects' Dependencies

Make sure that you're in the project's root directory (the same one in which the `Pipfile` resides), and then run,

```bash
pipenv install --dev
```

This will install all of the direct project dependencies as well as the development dependencies (the latter a consequence of the `--dev` flag).

### Running Python, IPython and JupyterLab from the Project's Virtual Environment

In order to continue development in a Python environment that precisely mimics the one the project was initially developed with, use Pipenv from the command line as follows,

```bash
pipenv run python3
```

The `python3` command could just as well be `ipython3` or the JupterLab, for example,

```bash
pipenv run jupyter lab
```

This will fire-up a JupyterLab *where the default Python 3 kernel includes all of the direct and development project dependencies*. This is how we advise that the notebooks within this project are used.

### Automatic Loading of Environment Variables

Pipenv will automatically pick-up and load any environment variables declared in the `.env` file, located in the package's root directory. For example, adding,

```bash
SPARK_HOME=applications/spark-2.3.1/bin
```

Will enable access to this variable within any Python program, via a call to `os.environ['SPARK_HOME']`. Note, that if any security credentials are placed here, then this file **must** be removed from source control - i.e. add `.env` to the `.gitignore` file to prevent potential security risks.

### Pipenv Shells

Prepending `pipenv` to every command you want to run within the context of your Pipenv-managed virtual environment, can get very tedious. This can be avoided by entering into a Pipenv-managed shell,

```bash
pipenv shell
```

which is equivalent to 'activating' the virtual environment. Any command will now be executed within the virtual environment. Use `exit` to leave the shell session.

Commit message:

Updated README to discuss deployment work

README.md, after:

# Automating the Archetypal Machine Learning Workflow and Model Deployment

This repository contains a Python-based Machine Learning (ML) project, whose primary aim is to demonstrate the archetypal ML workflow within a Jupyter notebook, together with some proof-of-concept ideas on automating key steps, using the Titanic binary classification dataset hosted on [Kaggle](https://www.kaggle.com). The ML workflow includes: data exploration and visualisation, feature engineering, model training and selection. The notebook - `titanic-ml.ipynb` - also yields a persisted prediction pipeline (pickled to the `models` directory), that is used downstream in the model deployment process. Note, that we have already downloaded the data from Kaggle, in CSV format, to the `data` directory of this project's root directory.

The secondary aim of this project, is to demonstrate how the deployment of the model generated as a 'build artefact' of the modelling notebook, can be automatically deployed as a managed RESTful prediction service on Kubernetes, without having to write **any** custom code. The full details are contained in the `deploy/deploy-model.ipynb` notebook, where we lean very heavily on the approaches discussed [here](https://github.com/AlexIoannides/kubernetes-ml-ops).

## Managing Project Dependencies using Pipenv

We use [pipenv](https://docs.pipenv.org) for managing project dependencies and Python environments (i.e. virtual environments). All of the direct packages dependencies required to run the code (e.g. NumPy for arrays/tensors and Pandas for DataFrames), as well as all the packages used during development (e.g. flake8 for code linting and IPython for interactive console sessions), are described in the `Pipfile`. Their **precise** downstream dependencies are described in `Pipfile.lock`.

### Installing Pipenv

To get started with Pipenv, first of all download it - assuming that there is a global version of Python available on your system and on the PATH, then this can be achieved by running the following command,

```bash
pip3 install pipenv
```

Pipenv is also available to install from many non-Python package managers. For example, on OS X it can be installed using the [Homebrew](https://brew.sh) package manager, with the following terminal command,

```bash
brew install pipenv
```

For more information, including advanced configuration options, see the [official pipenv documentation](https://docs.pipenv.org).

### Installing this Projects' Dependencies

Make sure that you're in the project's root directory (the same one in which the `Pipfile` resides), and then run,

```bash
pipenv install --dev
```

This will install all of the direct project dependencies as well as the development dependencies (the latter a consequence of the `--dev` flag).

### Running Python, IPython and JupyterLab from the Project's Virtual Environment

In order to continue development in a Python environment that precisely mimics the one the project was initially developed with, use Pipenv from the command line as follows,

```bash
pipenv run python3
```

The `python3` command could just as well be `ipython3` or the JupterLab, for example,

```bash
pipenv run jupyter lab
```

This will fire-up a JupyterLab *where the default Python 3 kernel includes all of the direct and development project dependencies*. This is how we advise that the notebooks within this project are used.

### Automatic Loading of Environment Variables

Pipenv will automatically pick-up and load any environment variables declared in the `.env` file, located in the package's root directory. For example, adding,

```bash
SPARK_HOME=applications/spark-2.3.1/bin
```

Will enable access to this variable within any Python program, via a call to `os.environ['SPARK_HOME']`. Note, that if any security credentials are placed here, then this file **must** be removed from source control - i.e. add `.env` to the `.gitignore` file to prevent potential security risks.

### Pipenv Shells

Prepending `pipenv` to every command you want to run within the context of your Pipenv-managed virtual environment, can get very tedious. This can be avoided by entering into a Pipenv-managed shell,

```bash
pipenv shell
```

which is equivalent to 'activating' the virtual environment. Any command will now be executed within the virtual environment. Use `exit` to leave the shell session.
